                 HI-TECH C 3.09 (CP/M-80) REVIEW
                       By Steve Goldsmith
                            07/19/93
-------------------------------------------------------------------

Hi there,

     I have just finished up my first release of a ANSI C tool box
of fast video routines for the C128's VDC.  I used the Freeware HI-
TECH C compiler package I down loaded from GEnie.  I spent a week
using this package and I would like to share a few observations
with you.

I have 13 years (9 of it professional) of programming experience on
various OS platforms including C64, C128, Apple ][, IBM PC
(networks), IBM 4300, IBM AS/400, NCR Century 300, Wang VS, Qantel
minis, etc.  I haven't had the pleasure of running a UNIX system
though.  I have been using Object Pascal (the C++ of Pascal) the
past 2 or 3 years and prefer it for MS DOS, Windows 3.x and DPMI
programming.  I also have experience with 6502, Z80 and x86
Assembler, BASIC, Report Generator and most other languages they
make you take at college and use in the business world.  Just a
little background, so you don't think I'm a Cyber Punk that plays
video games all day and night.

Once in a while I take a break from the PC and AS/400 world and
hack on my C128D in CP/M mode.  When I saw that there was a FREE C
compiler I had to take a look at it even though I haven't used C
before.  I knew one day I would have to learn C because most jobs
require it instead of COBOL.  Since I'm an experienced programmer
I know what I like in a development system no matter what language
it is.  With that said let's take a closer look at HI-TECH C!

I'm not going to rate HI-TECH C (HTC) on a scale like so many PC
rags.  I'm just going to tell you what I like and don't like about
HTC.  I use Turbo Pascal 3.1 (TP3) for CP/M and I think it is still
one of the best CP/M compilers around.  I will be comparing TP3 to
HTC since most of the other CP/M compilers I've used are not full
implementations of the language.

WHAT I LIKE ABOUT HI-TECH C 3.09

1.   It's a complete ANSI C.  Compared to K and R or Small C only
     compilers.  ANSI C makes non-hardware dependent code more
     portable across various platforms.

2.   Only one command needed to compile, assemble and link code.

3.   Strong type checking.  A must for us die hard Pascal
     programmers.  Helps prevent run time errors cause by type
     mismatching.

4.   Generates small fast code.  Doesn't require fixed size run
     time library (RTL) like TP3.  Only links code that is used, so
     there is no dead code linked in your .COM file.  TP3's RTL is
     8K, so your .COM file will be at least 8K no matter what.

5.   RTL source is provided to modify or learn from.

6.   Gives you the option to generate .OBJect and .ASsembler
     files without invoking the linker.

7.   It's free!

WHAT I DON'T LIKE ABOUT HI-TECH C 3.09

1.   It's quite slow.  I'm running a C128D with 800K and 360K
     floppies.  I would recommend using a RAM disk or hard drive
     for the .COM and work files.  Keep your source on a floppy. 
     I was able to read two C language books while waiting for
     compiles!  You could also use a CP/M-80 emulator on a PC for
     faster compiles.  TP3 blows HTC away in this respect!

2.   No integrated development environment (IDE) like TP3.  You'll
     have to find a good text editor to maintain your C source
     files.  I use the TP3 editor since it can execute HTC's
     compiler and return you to edit your source.  It is also old
     fashioned to just dump the compiler error messages to the
     screen instead of putting it on the offending line in the
     source code.  This sounds kind of picky, but Borland has been
     doing it for 10 years!

3.   The optimizer locks up when using in-line Assembler with the
     #asm #endasm directives.  It compiles and runs fine until you
     use the -O switch.  The optimizer just locks up in the same
     place without warning!  At the end of the review I'll give you
     the names of the source files, so you can take a look at this
     problem.  Mabey I have a bad optimizer?

4.   The manual has some weird codes embedded which have to be
     removed before printing to a PC printer.  Is this in a word
     processor format?

As you can see I don't have any major gripes about HTC other than
the optimizer lock up.  I can recommend HTC for beginners as well
as advanced users.  If you haven't used C before I would pick up a
couple of books before trying to write anything of substance.  If
you want to give HTC a try then download the following from GEnie's
CP/M RT (m685;3):

FREEware C Compiler for HI-TECH Software!  See Z80V309.LZH,
Z80DOC.LZH and LIBSRC.LZH in the Software Library.  Demo versions
of their DOS-based cross compilers are also available!

Source to my C128 fast video module is the CP/M and Flagship RT
(m625;3):

SGTOOL10.ARC

Steve Goldsmith

S.GOLDSMITH2 on GEnie
